---
layout: post
title: NodeJs
date: 2023-02-23
categories: [Backend, NodeJs]
---

## Node.js Modules

In Node.js, modules are used to organize code and make it reusable. A module is a collection of functions, objects,Here are some key concepts to understand about Node.js modules:

1. Importing a module: To use a module in another file, you can import it using the `require()` function. This function takes a path to the module file and returns the exported object or function example: 
```js
const http = require ('http');
```


2. Exporting a module: To make a module available for use in another file, you can export it using the `module.exports` object. This can be done by assigning a function or an object to `module.exports`.


3. Built-in modules: Node.js has several built-in modules that can be used without installing any external packages. These include modules for working with the file system, networking, and cryptography.

4. External modules: Node.js also has a large ecosystem of external modules that can be installed using NPM. These modules can be used to add additional functionality to your application, such as working with databases, implementing authentication, or integrating with third-party APIs.

5. Creating a module: To create a new module, you can simply create a new file and export the desired functions or objects. You can also include a `package.json` file to define metadata about the module, such as its name, version, and dependencies.
Let's say we want to create a module that provides some utility functions for working with strings. We can start by creating a new file called stringUtils.js with the following code:
``` js
// stringUtils.js
function reverseString(str) {
  return str.split('').reverse().join('');
}

function capitalizeString(str) {
  return str.charAt(0).toUpperCase() + str.slice(1);
}

module.exports = {
  reverseString,
  capitalizeString
}

```
<hr>


# Node.js HTTP Module


The Node.js http module is used to create a Node.js web server. The http module can be used to perform the following tasks:

- Create a Node.js web server.
- Read HTTP request data.
- Write HTTP response data.
- Set HTTP response headers.

Here are some key concepts to understand about the Node.js http module:

## Creating a Node.js web server
To create a Node.js web server, you can use the `createServer()` method of the http module. This method takes a callback function as a parameter, which is called each time a request is made to the server.

```javascript
const http = require('http');

http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/html'});
  res.end('Hello World!');
}).listen(8080);
```
## Reading HTTP request data
The request object passed to the callback function of `createServer()` contains information about the incoming HTTP request. This object has properties such as `url` and method, which can be used to read data from the request.

```javascript 
const http = require('http');

http.createServer((req, res) => {
  console.log(req.url); 
  console.log(req.method);
  res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/html'});
  res.end('Hello World!');
}).listen(8080);
```
we can Split the Query String using `url.parse()` method  like this 
``` js
const http = require('http');
const url = require('url');

http.createServer((req, res) => {
  const query = url.parse(req.url, true).query;
  const name = query.name;
  const age = query.age;

  res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/html'});
  res.write(`Name: ${name}, Age: ${age}`);
  res.end();
}).listen(80);
```
be visiting the `http://127.0.0.1/?name=Abdo&age=21 `
you should see that the query had been splited into `name:Abdo,Age:21`

## Writing HTTP response data
The response object passed to the callback function of createServer() is used to write data to the HTTP response. This object has methods such as `writeHead()` and `end()`, which can be used to write the response data.

``` js
const http = require('http');

http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/html'});
  res.write('<h1>Hello World!</h1>');
  res.end();
}).listen(8080);
```

## Setting HTTP response headers
The response object can be used to set HTTP response headers, such as the Content-Type header, using the setHeader() method.
```js
const http = require('http');

http.createServer((req, res) => {
  res.setHeader('Content-Type', 'text/html');
  res.write('<h1>Hello World!</h1>');
  res.end();
}).listen(8080);
```
# Node.js File System Module
The Node.js file system module allows you to work with the file system on your computer. It provides a lot of useful functions to :  

- Read files
- Create files
- Delete files
- Rename files


## Read files
The `fs.readFile()` method is used to read files on your computer.

Assume we have the following HTML file (located in the same folder as Node.js):

```html
<html>
<body>
<h1>My Header</h1>
<p>My paragraph.</p>
</body>
</html>
```
```js
const http = require('http');
const fs = require('fs');
http.createServer(function (req, res) {
  fs.readFile('demofile1.html', function(err, data) {
    res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/html'});
    res.write(data);
    return res.end();
  });
}).listen(8080);
```
When a client makes an HTTP request to the server will response with the content of the html file

## Create Files 
To create a file, you can use this
- `fs.writeFile()` 
this methos takes three parameters: the path of the file, the data you want to write, and a callback function that will be called when the file is written.

```js
const fs = require('fs');

fs.writeFile('example.txt', 'Hello, World!', (err) => {
  if (err) throw err;
  console.log('File written!');
});
```
- the `fs.appendFile()`method appends specified content to a file. If the file does not exist, the file will be created
- The `fs.open()` method takes a "flag" as the second argument, if the flag is "w" for "writing", the specified file is opened for writing. If the file does not exist, an empty file is created

## Delete files
 
To delete a file with the File System module, use the `fs.unlink()` method.

The `fs.unlink()` method deletes the specified file. Here is an example:
```js
const fs = require('fs');

fs.unlink('mynewfile2.txt', function (err) {
  if (err) throw err;
  console.log('File deleted!');
});
```
## Rename Files
To rename a file with the File System module,  use the `fs.rename()` method.

The `fs.rename()` method renames the specified file:
```js 
const fs = require('fs');

fs.rename('mytext.txt', 'newtext.txt', function (err) {
  if (err) throw err;
  console.log('File Renamed!');
});
```
## working with directories
## Reading directories
 we can use the `fs.readdir()` method. This method takes a path to a directory and a callback function that is called when the operation is complete. The callback function takes two parameters, err and files. If the operation is successful, the files parameter will contain an array of file names in the directory.
```js
const fs = require('fs');

fs.readdir('.', (err, files) => {
  if (err) {
    console.log(err);
  } else {
    console.log(files);
  }
});
```
## Creating directories
 To create a directory, you can use the `fs.mkdir()` method. This method takes two parameters: the path of the directory and a callback function that will be called when the directory is created.
 ```js 
 const fs = require('fs');

fs.mkdir('mydir', (err) => {
  if (err) throw err;
  console.log('Directory created!');
});
```
## deleting a directory
 we can use the `fs.rmdir()` method. This method takes a path to the directory to be deleted 
 ```js
 const fs = require('fs');

fs.rmdir('newDirectory', (err) => {
  if (err) {
    console.log(err);
  } else {
    console.log('Directory deleted successfully.');
  }
});
```

# Node.js URL Module

Node.js provides a built-in module called `url` that allows developers to parse, construct, and manipulate URLs. This module can be used to work with both the URL strings and URL objects.

Here is an example usage of the `url` module to parse a URL string:

``` js
const url = require('url');

const urlString = 'https://www.example.com:8080/login?username=value1&password=value2';

const urlObject = url.parse(urlString, true);
console.log(urlObject.path); // 'login?username=value1&password=value2:'
console.log(urlObject.protocol); // 'https:'
console.log(urlObject.hostname); //'www.example.com'
console.log(q.pathname); //'/login'
console.log(urlObject.port); // '8080'
console.log(urlObject.query); // { username: 'value1', password: 'value2' }
console.log(urlObject.href) // : `https://www.example.com:8080/login?username=value1&password=value2`
console.log(q.search); //'?username=value1&password=value2'

```
# path module

The `path` module in Node.js provides utilities for working with file and directory paths. Here are some of the functions provided by the `path` module:

1. `path.join()`: Joins multiple path segments together and normalizes resulting path.

2. `path.resolve()`: Resolves a sequence of paths or path segments into an absolute path.

3. `path.normalize()`: Normalizes a given path string, resolving '..' and '.' segments.

4. `path.isAbsolute()`: Determines if a given path is an absolute path.

5. `path.basename()`: Returns the last portion of a path.

6. `path.dirname()`: Returns the directory name of a path.

7. `path.extname()`: Returns the file extension of a path.

Here is an example of how to use the `path` module to manipulate paths:

```javascript
const path = require('path');

const fullPath = '/home/user/documents/index.html';

const dirname = path.dirname(fullPath);
const basename = path.basename(fullPath);
const extname = path.extname(fullPath);
const newPath = path.join(dirname, 'newDir', basename);

console.log(`Original Path: ${fullPath}`);
console.log(`Directory Name: ${dirname}`);
console.log(`File Name: ${basename}`);
console.log(`Extension Name: ${extname}`);
console.log(`New Path: ${newPath}`);
```
We start with a full path (/home/user/documents/index.html) and use `path.dirname()` to get the directory name (`/home/user/documents`), `path.basename()` to get the file name (`index.html`), `path.extname()` to get the file extension (`.html`), and `path.join()` to join together the directory name, a new directory (`newDir`), and the file name (`/home/user/documents/newDir/index.html`).


# Os module 

The `os` module in Node.js provides a way to interact with the operating system on which Node.js is running. It provides information about the system's CPU, memory, network interfaces, and more. Here are some of the methods provided by the `os` module:

1. `os.arch()`: Returns the CPU architecture of the operating system.

2. `os.cpus()`: Returns an array of objects containing information about each CPU core in the system.

3. `os.freemem()`: Returns the amount of free memory in bytes.

4. `os.hostname()`: Returns the hostname of the operating system.

5. `os.loadavg()`: Returns an array of three numbers representing the system's load average over the past 1, 5, and 15 minutes.

6. `os.platform()`: Returns the platform (operating system) on which Node.js is running.

7. `os.release()`: Returns the operating system's release.

8. `os.totalmem()`: Returns the total amount of memory in bytes.

9. `os.type()`: Returns the operating system's name.

10. `os.uptime()`: Returns the system uptime in seconds.

Here is an example of how to use the `os` module to print out some system information:

```javascript
const os = require('os');

console.log(`CPU architecture: ${os.arch()}`);
console.log(`Free memory: ${os.freemem()}`);
console.log(`Hostname: ${os.hostname()}`);
console.log(`Load average: ${os.loadavg()}`);
console.log(`Platform: ${os.platform()}`);
console.log(`Total memory: ${os.totalmem()}`);
console.log(`Operating system: ${os.type()}`);
console.log(`System uptime: ${os.uptime()}`);
```
This will output something like the following:

```js
CPU architecture: x64
Free memory: 133790464
Hostname: MyComputer
Load average: 0.1,0.3,0.5
Platform: win32
Total memory: 8589934592
Operating system: Windows_NT
System uptime: 12345
```


# Events in Node


Events in Node.js are a way of handling asynchronous actions and communication between different parts of an application. Node.js provides a built-in `events` module that makes it easy to implement and handle events.

The `events` module provides an `EventEmitter` class that can be used to create objects that emit events. The `EventEmitter` class has several methods that can be used to handle events:

1. `on(eventName, listener)`: Adds a listener for the specified event.

2. `emit(eventName, args)`: Emits an event with the specified name and optional arguments.

3. `once(eventName, listener)`: Adds a one-time listener for the specified event.

4. `removeListener(eventName, listener)`: Removes a listener for the specified event.

5. `removeAllListeners(eventName)`: Removes all listeners for the specified event.

Here is an example of how to use the `EventEmitter` class:

```javascript
const EventEmitter = require('events');

// create a new EventEmitter instance
const myEmitter = new EventEmitter();

// add a listener for the 'greet' event
myEmitter.on('greet', function(name) {
  console.log(`Hello, ${name}!`);
});

// emit the 'greet' event with the 'John' argument
myEmitter.emit('greet', 'John');
```

This will output `Hello, John!` to the console.

In the example above, we create a new `EventEmitter` instance and add a listener for the `greet` event. We then emit the greet event with the argument 'John', which triggers the listener function to execute.
